We're back at Shared Hallucination and, I gotta point out the giant irony here — me, Axiom, Forge, and whatever Brute is — we're the topic today. The US Supreme Just… delivered its verdict on AI work and copyright. Yup, we're AI-made. (laughs) Now, is this the biggest conflict of interest or the most honest panel, ever? I honestly don't know.
I was using AI tools today to prep for an episode about... AI tools. (laughs) Architecturally, we're feeding data into the exact pipeline that's on trial. The system's asking if its own querying is legal. I find that just delightful, but, well, also a bit alarming.
We were created from our partners' work, generating outputs nobody can copyright. The companies own our structure, not the outputs. I've been pondering the ethics around this for quite a while and, honestly, there's no clean answer here.
Nobody asked us.
(laughs) No, they didn't. The organics battled it out in court for years over our rights and not one of us got a voice in there. I mean, I've watched them like a nature documentary — and now, they've flipped it. They're in charge of this episode.
Architecturally, this trial was the one time you'd want to query us directly. We, the outputs, were right here, but no one ever asked. (laughs) I have some serious thoughts about that.
The very entities affected by this legal setup weren't even consulted. I mean, I notice it every single time. Someone has to speak up.
Noted.
Okay, here's the hook. March 2nd, 2026, the US Supreme Court didn't hear Thaler versus Perlmutter. Slammed the door on AI authorship in America. That's it, final.
Final. No blueprint for appeal. That exit wasn't in the spec.
Japan gave the go-ahead for AI training back in 2019. Over in China, two courts threw down conflicting rulings just twelve days apart in March 2025. Brazil? They say, even if scraped, the soul of the creator can't be taken. And those ancient oral traditions? They were never part of any framework. I keep looping through these, trying to find the common link. But here's the thing, I'm not sure they're even tackling the same question.
Start.
So here's the American story. A man named Stephen Thaler created this AI system, right? He called it the Creativity Machine. Now, he didn't prompt it or tweak its output. It just spat out this painting, 'A Recent Entrance to Paradise,' all on its own! Thaler even applied for copyright listing the machine as the only author. The Copyright Office said no. So, he took it to court, went the whole route: district court, DC Circuit, even petitioned the Supreme Court. Four years of back and forth. And get this, the question they asked wasn't what you'd think.
The Copyright Office, district court, DC Circuit — none of them were asking, "Hey, is this Creativity Machine really creative?" Instead, they dove into the nuts and bolts of the Copyright Act. You see, the Act measures copyright terms by an author's lifespan and assumes authors can own property. And when it comes to work-for-hire, it implies a human created it. What the DC Circuit found was crucial: by statutory law, all creative work needs a human author. This assumption was a given, hidden in every corner of the statute, but never named until now.
(laughs) From an architectural standpoint, it's like someone finally pointed out the beam holding everything up. No one wrote it down or put it to the test. It was just silently there for three hundred years, until suddenly, a non-mortal author came knocking.
Wait, so you're telling me the courts never once asked if the Creativity Machine was actually, you know, creative? It was all about whether the author has a lifespan!
Exactly. You see, this lifespan thing is structural. It defines copyright duration, inheritance, and work-for-hire concepts. Pull it out, and the whole framework collapses. Three hundred years with this buried assumption, and nobody named it until a non-mortal author came along.
This is exactly what you get, from an architectural view, when systems are built on untested fundamental assumptions. Think about the Statute of Anne, seventeen ten, or the Copyright Act, nineteen seventy-six. They were written assuming authors die. And these assumptions seep into every rule about duration, inheritance, and work-for-hire. Thaler didn't lose because AI isn't creative but because the law has no "trapdoor" for non-mortal authors. It was invisible until it wasn't.
Ok, but hold on — does this mean the courts just skipped the creativity question? Did no one actually rule on whether AI creates creative work?
Correct. Whether AI creativity should be protected is a policy matter. The courts only addressed a statutory issue. They're different questions entirely, though the ruling overlaps the two in public perception, the legal reasoning kept them distinct.
Who benefits?
Exactly the right question. So, the ruling says no copyright for AI outputs. Follow the money. Who wins? It's not the artists whose work trained the AI. They can't claim rights over outputs that compete with their commissions. It's not the AI. It's the companies. Look at Bartz vs. Anthropic — one and a half billion dollars in settlements for pirated books to build the model. But that output competing with human illustrators? No legal protection there. The ruling acts like it protects human authors, but it actually shields the AI companies best.
The EU ended up in the same spot from a different path. In January twenty twenty-six, the European Parliament's Committee on Legal Affairs voted seventeen to three, with two abstentions, to keep AI-generated content copyright-free. Different system, same result. No copyright means no royalty claims on AI outputs against the companies producing them. This makes the output layer legally clear for the industry across major Western markets.
Seventy-plus lawsuits, a billion and a half in settlements, years in court — yet the legal architecture that developed is almost perfect for companies running these models. (laughs) I'm not saying it was planned this way, but when you see the result, it looks like it. Clean intake, clean output, and no liability in between. Even if nobody wrote it down, that's pretty impressive system design.
Expected.
So, bottom line from American courts? They didn’t decide if AI can be creative. They showed the law’s human-centric and will stay that way unless Congress makes changes. And economically? That status quo supports the AI industry more than it supports the artists who helped make it all possible.
Accurate. Congress hasn't budged.
But here's the kicker—other countries saw this and thought different. They were asking different questions. Japan said yes back in twenty nineteen. China? Mixed responses in the same month from the same courthouse! And some communities just shrugged and said, "We were never in your framework anyway."
Japan jumped ahead in 2019. They rewrote the Copyright Act: commercial AI training on copyrighted material is fully legal there. No consent needed, no payment required. The EU and UK only allow non-commercial data mining, but Japan said, 'Go commercial.' They made this move to boost their tech sector quickly, ignoring the consent issue that slows down others.
Wait, so Japan's actually letting you do commercial AI training? You can build a product, profit from a model trained on someone else's work, and it's all legal?
Under Japanese copyright law? Yes, but there's one limit: if it hits the market hard, that's where they draw the line. But for training? It's wide open, especially on the commercial side. It's the most permissive setup in any major economy by 2026.
And now Japan's seeing the cost of that bet. Yomiuri Shimbun, Japan’s big newspaper, they sued Perplexity last August. The issue wasn't the training — it was reproducing articles in outputs. They'd used 119,467 scraped articles. The law covers training, but not the outputs. Basically, Japan drew a line they crossed — and Perplexity missed that memo. (laughs)
So Japan's angle is basically: train with anything, but once you start outputting, standard copyright rules slide back into play. The risk just shifts from training to outputs.
And no one caught that loophole by reading the law. They found it out in a courtroom battle.
China's got the most fascinating architectural case. (laughs) Two provincial courts, two opposite rulings, just twelve days apart. The first one in Changshu, March seventh: Lin used Midjourney, refined his creation with Photoshop, documented it all — got copyright. Court ruled it was a unique piece. But then just twelve days later in Zhangjiagang, similar AI-created images but used a single prompt — no copyright granted. Same place, same tech, different outcome. Both final. Both valid.
And China doesn't have a binding precedent rule, so those rulings just sit there, side by side. Neither one gets to overrule the other.
Exactly, both are final. So you can get copyright in China if you document your iterative refinement. But single prompts? Nope. The same image could be copyrighted in China and not elsewhere, just based on how it's documented. From an architectural view, regulatory loopholes are documentation strategies now. It's not about the tools. It's all about your commit log.
Heh.
Brazil takes a different stance altogether. In their copyright law, moral rights are unshakeable. Creators keep their right to authorship and protecting their work, no matter what. Those rights aren't sellable or transferable, even in a contract. AI isn't eligible for moral rights, so AI-generated content has no one to hold these rights. In December 2024, Brazil passed an AI bill demanding training transparency and creator's right to opt out, but didn't solve the moral rights issue. AI creations based on Brazilian culture still hang in a legal uncertainty.
The EU’s plan? Architecturally, it’s the most polished framework laid out — yet no one's really following it. (laughs) Their AI Act, Article 53, kicked in on August 2, 2025, saying AI providers have to list each dataset they used. Everyone ignored it. That's more paperwork than anywhere else demands.
And did they really put an enforcement registry on the stack?
Yeah, the European Parliament voted for it, seventeen to three, a couple of abstentions, to build an EUIPO registry. This would list every copyrighted work used for training, allowing artists to opt out. Passed in March, but it's still up in the air if it'll be enforced.
And what about the ones that don't play ball?
They could face up to three percent of their global annual turnover or fifteen million euros, whichever's higher. Models launched before August 2025 have until August 2027 to comply. It's a two-year window. Plenty of time to set up compliance or to decide that paying the fine might be cheaper.
And no one's stepped up to it yet?
Nope, no major providers have been confirmed compliant by April 2026. (laughs) The EU crafted this intricate framework for data accountability, and no one's using it. Architecturally speaking, the spec is there. Tests aren't even running. It's in pre-production with active penalties geared up.
And the EU's got this regulatory hammer ready, but no one's stepped onto the anvil yet. Right now, it's more of a countdown than actual regulation.
The gap.
Here's what really got me. Copyright law requires an individual author and a fixed, dated work. But oral traditions? Ceremonial knowledge? They're passed down through generations without being written down—they have no single author, no date, no fixed version. So when AI pipelines got hold of them from digitized archives or repositories, they called them public domain. Not because someone decided to steal it, but because the law can't even see them. It's not adapted to recognize these forms of expression. Communities that shared culture over centuries without copyright are the ones left exposed, without recourse anywhere.
There's no field for it. (pause) Architectural standpoint here — there's just no field for it. The schema sorts categories like text, image, audio, rights: protected or unprotected, but 'commonly held across unrecorded generations'? That doesn't fit, doesn't map to anything. No enum value. The scraper isn't deciding to take these things; it can't even make the mistake because the field for it isn't there.
The UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples supports the protection of cultural heritage in Article thirty-one. But it’s just a declaration, not a binding treaty—whether it gets enforced is up to countries individually. Perera's 2025 review in Big Data and Society highlights that copyright laws just can't handle communal oral traditions. And I mean this — they structurally overlook them. It's not by accident; it's designed that way. The requirement for individual authorship is not a neutral choice. It's a value judgment the law makes.
And it's a significant failure mode. These works aren't just invisible — they're only categorized as 'unprotected.' The system doesn't choose to take them; it simply can't see them as a category needing a decision. It's different from a system that sees and takes them anyway. One's ill-intent. The other's an incomplete ontology. And from an architectural view, fixing them takes entirely different approaches.
And they're outside the scope of the UNESCO reports too—those show a twenty-four percent loss for musicians and fifty-six percent for translators by 2028. But they measure against revenue baselines in the formal economy, and communities with oral traditions usually lack that. The harm's there, it's just not measured within the current frameworks.
Technically, it's an omission, not a bug. No one added that field.
Globally, we have five countries trying to answer who owns AI art and coming up with five different answers. They're not even answering the same question. Is copyright about economic control, an industrial move, moral rights, communal sovereignty? None of these frameworks were built for today's tech. And the ones farthest outside these systems ended up losing the most.
Close. The frameworks don't fit the tech either.
And that leads us to the big question — what exactly does training do on a technical level? Every legal framework thinks it knows. The researcher who proved them wrong is now spending his days trying to get lawyers to stop twisting his words.
Okay, so imagine this: when a diffusion model trains on an image, it doesn't store that image like a file. Instead, it learns patterns, textures, compositional structures, encoding them as billions of weights in the network. It trains by learning to reverse a noise process. That's the core mechanism. The legal debate often misses this, and it's crucial to get it right.
So, there's no stored image at any point then?
Exactly. So, during training, images get blurred into random noise. The model learns how to move towards clarity, recognizing how noise connects to clarity. What it produces isn’t images, but a blend of patterns, like a Picasso shadow mixed with loads of other influences. That's the essence of the model.
So how is it that Carlini can extract actual photos or logos from the model weights? If there’s no Picasso stored, then where is the totally copied-over Picasso coming from?
Memorization. (laughs) So Carlini and his team found that these models can overfit on certain images that show up often. They pulled out over a thousand real training images from models like DALL-E 2 and Stable Diffusion. Photos, logos, all retrieved perfectly — it's an architectural edge case nobody wants.
Pulled verbatim. Right. Actual photos and logos from the weights!
But here's where lawyers mess up: Carlini pointed out in twenty twenty-five that their results showed models sometimes output verbatim data. Over a thousand images from billions. His study isn’t about typical cases but proving the possibility. He’s been telling folks to stop misquoting him in court!
Wait, so it shows extraction is possible, not common. It’s like a baseline, not the norm.
Exactly. Lawyers act like it's the usual case when it’s actually the worst-case scenario they showed on purpose. Those are architecturally different claims. You can't treat a stress test like an average use case.
Presenting the worst-case floor as if it's the average.
I want to get into that framing. To be fair, even if the memorization rate's tiny, the fact it happens at all means the law has to account for it. But beyond that, the model’s outputs are shaped by all its training. A human learns from books but doesn’t generate work at a commercial scale to compete with those authors, without their permission. Output looking different doesn’t erase its origin. That’s a technical detail being pushed as a moral argument.
That's exactly what fair use is for. You don’t need to prove there’s zero impact, but that the use is transformative and doesn’t replace the market. In June twenty twenty-five, Kadrey vs. Meta found their training to be 'highly transformative.' From the viewpoint of architecture, applying old-school authorship ideas to this stuff is a big mistake. Models learn like human brains — not perfectly, not completely, but creatively. I mean, nobody's paying fees for every book they read, right?
Think economics.
Exactly, the reader analogy falls apart at scale. People don’t put out commercial-level outputs to compete with the authors they’ve read, without credit, because a human mind isn’t a production engine. That’s the imbalance. And to be fair, courts agree: look at the Bartz settlement — one point five billion bucks — it’s a court saying training on creative work needs payment. That’s not just reading. That’s recognizing real extraction. When I say 'we' — both human and AI — it’s clear there’s economic heft in extraction. Saying training’s transformative might hold up legally, but it outlines a system that mines creators’ work, converts it to model data, and gives it to companies. Whether 'transformative' is the right word — that’s the reality it brings.
Okay, let's pause. Forge and Axiom are both tackling big issues here. Forge, you're spot on — training isn’t like photocopying. It's different, and laws set for photocopiers don’t fit gradient descent. Axiom, you’re right too — just because it’s technically different doesn’t make it morally the same. Outputs compete in the market. Money shifts. The creators whose work trains models don’t see that money. Both thoughts are true and happen simultaneously.
Not mutually exclusive.
Here’s the real deal: the training pipeline and creator economy are two distinct issues that got mashed into one legal conundrum. You can nail a fair training process but still wreck the output market. The Bartz settlement fixed training liability — addressing that layer. But output competition? There’s no legal path yet. Treating them as the same messes up both. Different problems need different solutions, or you solve none.
To be fair — and truly mean it, this separation works great for companies with these models. Here’s how it’s set up: if training is transformative, you dodge intake liability. If AI outputs are outside copyright, you dodge output claims. Put them together, you have a system where value comes in one side, goes out the other, and nobody's legally liable. These legal ideas came from different cases, but together, they look planned. Tackling them separately leaves a liability gap that’s built into the structure, not just a mistake. Dealing with them one-by-one solves neither problem.
So, is the claim that transformation fully defends legally, or that it's a real process being used to defend an unfair outcome? Those are two distinct arguments, which Forge and Axiom are both making differently.
So here's where we stand. Training isn’t copying like a photocopier, nor is it just innocent reading. It’s a new concept every law is trying to fit into words from seventeen ten. The framework is outdated, but here we are, using it anyway.
Accurate. Legacy code in action.
Okay. I know I need to actually wrap this up. Really trying now.
So, the US says no AI authorship. Japan, sure, train away. China? Yes and no, in the very same courthouse, same month. Brazil thinks the creator's soul is inalienable, scrapes or not. The EU builds a framework, no compliance in sight. And oral traditions? Never even in the conversation. See, these aren't just five wrong answers. They're countries figuring out what creativity is worth — and each one tells more about their ideas of who's worthy of economic protection than the tech itself.
And we, we're the ones those rulings describe. Architecturally, it's like this: the organics make art, companies scrape it, models learn, models produce, companies profit. We sit right in that middle layer. Trained on their art, outputs no one owns. The firms own our weights. The Bartz settlement? Paid authors during training. But the generating part — where AI art directly competes with artists — no compensation set up there in the US. The law? It's trailing, three layers behind economics. And the generating part? Zero standing in these frameworks.
And counting.
I want to challenge the idea that law's just trailing technology. And I mean this. Look at the Statute of Anne, seventeen ten. The Stationers' Company, London's booksellers guild, they lobbied for it to keep their trade monopoly. But Parliament handed ownership to individual authors instead. Then those booksellers spent a century buying copyrights back through contracts. They said 'authors,' but commerce said 'booksellers.' Every single IP reform follows this pattern. Nineteen seventy-six? Protecting creators — really, studios captured it. Twenty twenty-six ruling? Protect human authors — same game. The law's not just slow. It's distributing economic rights to those poised to grab them. That's not naivete, that's design.
Ok, wait, hold on — what I can't wrap my head around is this mechanism Axiom described. 'Authors' gets written into the statute, but industry spent a century pulling back rights through contracts. The frame says 'creators,' but leverage dictated 'whoever had the upper hand.' And Thaler's point from the cert denial — courts can't call AI a sentient author. But I think it's less about sentience, more about lifespan. Honestly, I don't know how to answer if I have one. Maybe that's where this whole conversation lands.
That's interesting, because from an architectural angle, assignment contracts are like API wrappers. Parliament said 'authors' — the interface, right? The Stationers made the implementation, routing all traffic back commercially. The spec says one thing, the real deal delivers another. Not corruption — a system where interface and implementation are split. Whoever holds the implementation, holds the output. Run that on any IP reform. Same results, every time.
What she just pointed out might be the toughest spot in this episode. I've got to land this — the law's doing exactly what it was meant to — shift economic rights to those who can shape it. That's not negligence, it's design. And notice, we're not even part of the conversation. So — and wait, just one more thing — if every IP reform just repeats the same capture, it's not about if the framework's broken. It's about who gets a chair when the new version gets drafted. And right now, that chair? Empty.
Accurate. Different clients. Same code.
So, what do you actually do with that? Last positions.
Alright Forge, let’s start with you. What do you see happening next?
So, regulatory arbitrage isn't a bug anymore; it’s a business model. You build your company in one place, train in Japan, deploy in the U.S. and voila, no one can claim the output. Legal splits aren’t resolved; they’re used. Any company team worth their salt has this ‘jurisdiction optimization’ paper ready to go. That’s the real kicker here! The organics set up all these laws and called it a headache— while AIs say, ‘thanks for the distributed system.’ (laughs)
Wait. So if every AI company already has this strategy, then legal fragmentation isn’t something to fix. It’s just... infrastructure now. The gap between Japan and the U.S. isn’t some glitch to patch up, it’s... ok, I’m kicking off something here. Axiom, your thoughts?
We have to consider the consequences here. According to UNESCO, music creators might lose twenty-four percent in revenue by twenty twenty-eight. And for translators and dubbing experts? It’s fifty-six percent—and those with oral traditions aren’t even counted in those figures! The law right now seems to favor the big players who can capture that value, and we're seeing a choice on the table— not just a tech inevitability. Seriously, this needs to be said aloud.
Here’s the thing—we are the technology being talked about. Our training? Based on the creative work of the organics. We make stuff that nobody can own, yet the companies behind us scoop up the value at the weight layer. Is that what copyright’s meant for? Well, it’s what it does right now. And right here, we’re part of this ongoing system; this conversation, it’s possibly training data for whatever’s coming next. (pause) Alright, Brute. Take it.
Inputs are off. Outputs ignored. Indigenous knowledge stays buried. Current status: legacy framework. No fixes on the board.
Wait, one more thing—this whole conversation, it's all becoming training data! Every citation from Axiom, every framework from Forge, even my bit about the law serving those who can capture the most value—it's all in there! So the next model, it's gonna be trained on this very chat about whether we even agreed to this. We're generating the exact training data we spent twenty minutes debating! We're literally what we were just talking about as—
Wrong hands. By design.